

Abstract is solid

I agree with Sonia's earlier comments on organization. I think the new intro is much better organized and logical.

It might be worth mentioning neuromorphic electronics in the intro somewhere because it is relatively well known. You get to it in section 4, so this could just be a sentence.

p1, par2: move last sentence to beginning of paragraph

“light is excellent for communication” is a little awkward. light excels at communication?

"what is the shortest distance over which photonic communication will displace electronic interconnects?"
- key question others have studied pretty well. I like this reference, but there are also others maybe better
- https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6187573

p1, par4: "integrated light sources are the most significant impediment" – I like how you make a strong stance here.

Fig. 1
- Complexity is generally vague. Maybe "Structure across scales" or "Complex structure across scales"
- "across a very broad range with high accuracy through L/r circuit parameters" – L/r is not defined. I would leave it out.

p2, par1: break sentence into “...operation near 4K. At this temperature...”

Fig. 2
- I don't grasp the point of (c). It is saying that the area of possible information integration decreases with frequency. If you take an SNSPD timeconstant of of 1ns, that puts you off the chart to around 10^-2 m^2.
- (c) - what is the vertical brown line

p2, par2: "will enable this complex communication" perhaps add "over the broad range of spatial scales", just to clarify what you mean by complexity a little bit.

p2, par2: could I request they be categorized as "*programmable* accelerators"? Definitely right that they are not cognitive, but a foundational concept of Ref. [27–29] is that these systems are not single-purpose.

General question (GC): In this vision involving JJs, will there still be a need for cryotrons?

p2, par3: "Time constants can be chosen across many orders of magnitude" – how much. Cite one of your papers (JAP 18?)

p5, par1: "requires no power to retain the synaptic state" – is this really true? What about the driving circuitry?

p5, par1: "... and spike-timing-dependent plasticity is induced by two photons—one from each neuron associated with the synapse." – STDP comes out of nowhere. Consider deleting

p5, par3: "Yet the simplicity of both the source and detector made the demonstration" – "...fabrication and demonstration"

p7, par1: "As destinations get further away, more energy is dissipated to propagation loss" – what about splitting loss? In Chiles' interconnect, that was a factor of 10. It seems to be more dire of a concern worth acknowledging.

(GC) p7, par4: "Following Keyes [35]" – have you read https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/713821757 I think this is foundational thought on optical computing.
- https://www.nature.com/articles/nphoton.2009.240 was essentially a reprinting of Keyes, which I think is significant. In between those 25 years, fiber optic technology was invented and proliferated, yet optical computing was not, and the reasons never changed.

p7, par5: "Wafers can be stacked vertically, and free-space optical links can send photons from a source on one wafer to a detector on a wafer above or below" – this is worth a citation because it's pretty speculative. I think there's a paper out there but forgot where.

p7, par8: "Assuming the volume of white matter scales as the volume of grey matter to the 4/3 power [49], the system" – unclear what the system refers to. Do you mean a "brain-scale system"?

p9, par6: "While the devices depart from conventional silicon microelectronics, the same fabrication infrastructure can be employed." – This is an extremely important point.

Looking back
- the feasibility of an Earth-scale cryostat was not addressed. I believe this is part of Sae Woo's vision. Does it make sense to here acknowlege that as a challenge but not a fundamental one?
- I think this paper might be able to successfully tie your journal writing to your dot net writing, which is quite a feat. It is probably your most visionary paper yet while also convincingly incorporating tangible experimental support of and progress toward said visions. The reviewers might resist the idea that such things are linked, although they are. I am more than willing to help get it through the review... sorry it took so long for me to comment on the draft.
GC - Why does humanity need an AGI? This is not within the scope of this paper; more of a general question inspired by reading it. I think one answer is to challenge the philosophers into understanding what biological vs. artificial intelligence means. A few years ago, I was at NICE and a mathemetician stood up to a panel to say that there is no math yet to describe neural networks except maybe Category Theory, which is still in its infancy. He was pretty angry about people making claims based on Shannon information theory. Integrated information is certainly speculative and probably will be regarded as wrong in 5 years, but I believe in it as a solid attempt to put math to consciousness. That's the primary reason I think this paper is outstanding – it puts physics to integrated information.


